I'm just, okay.
Um, good evening.
It is Tuesday, January 6th, 2026.
And I call this meeting of our city council to order.
I need a motion to go into executive session. So moved.
So motion moved by Counselor Matthews,
the executive session.
Two items. Executive session pursuant to
MRSA 4 0 5 6 D to discuss police
and fire union contracts.
And our second executive session will be
another 4 0 5 6 E
to discuss the jetport tree cutting agreement.
Do we have a vote a second.
Oh, do, oh, we need a second for this also.
Do we have a second? Second. She. Thank you.
Counselor Walker? Yep. She had her hand up.
Alright, thank you. A vote to go into executive session.
That's five counselors voting in the affirmative. Thank you.
Now call this meeting of the city council to order on
Tuesday, January 6th.
Um, please stand if you wish to,
to join me in pledging allegiance to the flag
of the Republic of the United States. I pledge all
Allegiance to the flag of the United States of America
and to the republic for which it stands,
one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty
and justice for
All. Thank you
Madam Clerk.
May we have a roll call of our council, please?
Counselor Coleman. Here. Counselor Matthews? Yes ma'am.
Counselor Pride. Here. Counselor Scott? Here.
Counselor Walker Here. Counselor West here.
And Mayor Tipton here.
Are there any additions
or corrections that any counselors have to the minutes
of our last meeting?
If there are no objections, we'll pass the minutes
by unanimous consent.
Thank you. Excuse me.
All right. Um, that takes us
to petitions and communications.
This is just a reminder for the public
that we are still accepting applications for the 26
to 28 election clerks.
The application is available online as well
as hard copies in our office,
and the appointments will be done in April.
So there is still plenty of time,
but just again, reminding everyone that they are available.
Thank you very much. Um, we are going to move
by unanimous consent, our appointment calendar
unless there are any objections, seeing none.
That is moved. We have postponed it until our next meeting.
We're looking at our consent calendar next,
but first we would like
to hear the rules for public comment.
Members Of the public are invited
to comment on any topic, on
or off the agenda during citizen discussion, part one
or part two for up to three minutes.
If you are here to speak on an item appearing on tonight's
agenda, you are encouraged to wait
until this item comes up on the agenda
where you will have three minutes to speak.
If you are unable to wait, you may speak on the matter
during citizen discussion Part one,
however, you will not be permitted
to speak on the topic Again.
Similarly, if a member
of the public speaks on a topic when it comes up on the
agenda, you may not speak on that topic Again
during citizen discussion.
Part two, we ask all speakers
to see their name and address for the record.
Okay, we're not quite at public comment yet.
Um, we'll get there in a moment.
I also wanted to add that when you speak for public comment,
you do see a timer on both of our screens
to help you pace yourself
and the city clerk lets anyone making public comment know
when you have 30 seconds left.
Easy peasy everybody.
Madam Clerk, will you please read the items on
the consent calendar? Of
Course.
Order number 65 25 26 age friendly South Portland Committee
Andy Chandler for filling the vacancy
order number 72 25 26 Waste Reduction Committee
for James dii for district two for an unexpired term
that expires on May 4th, 2027 in order
1 17 25 26 amending agreement with Danforth Cove Association
to update completion of the expenditure dates.
All items read on the consent calendar
require a majority vote.
Okay. Are there any counselors here who want
to remove an item on the consent calendar?
No, I don't see any.
Or is there any member of the public who wants
to p speak about an item on the consent calendar?
Just an item on the consent calendar right now.
Coming once. Going twice.
Alright, well we are going
to then vote on the consent calendar items.
What is the wish of the council?
Ooh, vying for our, our first motion
counselor pride. I,
I move for passage of the consent calendar.
I second that. Thank you Counselor Matthews.
Thank you so much. Um,
okay, let's vote.
Thank you. All in favor of passage
of the consent calendar items.
We have that and congratulations
and thank you to those who have been nominated
to serve on our committees.
It's too late to step back now. Now it's done. Thank you.
Okay. Um, excuse me.
We now have reached citizen discussion part one.
This is for items on
or off our agenda, other citizen discussion.
Part one is otherwise known as public comment.
This is our first comment period.
Please state your name and the street that you live on.
Happy New Year everyone. My name's Tim Honey.
I live at 2 1 5 High Street, unit 1 0 3 South Portland.
And I'm Conor, um, co coordinator
of the Toss the Tanks campaign.
And I'm here this evening to just review for you some
of the accomplishments that we have have, uh, had in, um,
2026.
Um, we believe that we have articulated a clear mission,
which is to create
and implement an alignment with the South Portland
City Council, a win-win strategy for the future of the
Hill Street Tank Farm.
Our mission also includes imagining the possibilities of
what might replace the tank farm, partnering
with the smart architect, uh, architectural firm to explore
possible redevelopment scenarios
and sharing that with the public at a forum
at the First Congregational Church of South Portland.
Working closely with the comp plan, um,
2 20 40 Comp comp plan committee
and getting some excellent language in the comp plan,
uh, which mirrors the goals of toss the tanks
and understanding why, um,
Suncor slash Portland Pipeline wants
to renew its operating license for the tanks
for two two 2026, even though they have no intention
of starting operations again.
And finally helping to get Sun Suncor to the um,
negotiation table,
which will hopefully occur in 2026.
Finally, we've been providing information
and research to the council, um,
and our toss the tanks members each month.
Uh, this currently includes timely research
and input on the Portland Pipeline's five year license
renewal application, which is currently before the DEP.
We are an advocacy organization
and not an implementation organization.
At this stage. It is very important
that the city create a city working committee of staff
and council to take the next steps towards
achieving our mutual goals for a win-win solution.
This committee should emerge as a part
of the city's 2026 goals,
which will be articulated in January at the
start of the budget process.
We recommend that this new committee take a deep dive
into the Fed, um, Everett Tank Farm redevelopment model
that I've spoken of before.
And to understand this amazing redevelopment project
in Everett, Massachusetts.
This project is almost exactly
what South Portland is attempting to achieve in terms
of the Hill Street Tank Farm.
It is now underway
and the strategy includes time, the City of Everett.
Thank you very much. Okay.
Okay. Alright.
Is there anyone else who would like to make public comment?
Yes, please. Hello everyone. I'm Mark Emmi.
I live in Pleasantdale
and uh, I have a tendency to talk a lot,
so I'm gonna try my best to stay within the time limit.
I have no choice, I guess.
Um, so I'm here to introduce an idea
that has been a dream of mine
for the past 25 years since I moved here.
And, and it has to do with Bud Light Park.
Um, I am proposing the idea of hosting a free
public festival, music festival, cultural arts festival.
Um, and I've talked to, uh, many
of the different departments, uh, parks
and Rec as well as the public arts and the city managers
and, uh, mayor, uh, Tipton.
Um, I wrote down, I'm not even using it.
So, um, it has two ideas.
It started off with a, a larger idea of having a, a, um,
a band that would bring in, uh, a lot of people
and would be a large event with two stages
and, uh, would have a higher budget.
And so after having great conversation with Scott
and Josh, uh, as well as Carl, uh, Jenna
and Anthony, who have all been really supportive,
we decided,
and they shed a lot of light on the reality of it,
that it would be best to target 2027
for the larger festival.
Um, and the idea is to partner with the city.
Um, that was my intent.
Since I became a a member of the public arts committee,
I really wanted to get, uh, involved in local politics.
So the idea is to, uh, involve the city,
all the different departments
that would make sense at Bug Light.
Uh, and from these discussions, uh, with Jenna
and Parks and Rec, um, we concluded that, uh,
and they encouraged me to go for it, um, in 2026,
but to do it independently.
And so I was inspired to go for it on going to rent the park
and host a a festival, um, on September 12th.
And, um, also partnering with the Human Rights Commission,
the Historical Preservation Department,
public Arts Department, and Parts
and Rec, where hopefully they can get involved
and be there to, you know, have contact with the community,
really highlight the city and what we offer.
Um, lastly, the history of Bud Light.
30 seconds makes it perfect
because I don't know if you know the history the Bud Light
is a, is based on a Greek monument which represented, uh,
patrons of the arts, uh, that funded music and performance.
So it's in line with what I want to do there.
And so I look forward to have the opportunity to talk more
with some of you and follow up this, uh, idea
and make it happen in September and 2027 as well.
So that's it, as fast as I can go.
Um, and I have, um, I have a handout for you,
which is it, A draft description with a logo
for the 2027 project, which would be bigger
and I would part, like, part the city.
Um, so you can hand it out.
Um, I'm just gonna take a chair's pro
prerogative for one second.
Um, and just ask,
would you say something about your being a musician?
Sure. I'm a musician. No. So
Go to the microphone. I just
think that helps your background
and it's interesting to our council,
we have a relatively light agenda tonight.
Yeah, sure. Um, uh, I'd like to start
that very quickly by saying, um, I had the opportunity
of working with Jenna in Parks and Rec
and she really inspired me to go for this idea.
And I met her because I was part
of the Mill Creek concert series
and I performed there with my band, Primo Banano.
I'm a trumpet player. I've been a professional musician
for 38 years.
I'm a promoter and an educator. Teach at SMCC.
I have five musical projects, Primo Banno,
which is a traditional Cuban band.
I have a jazz quintet.
And I recently joined a band
that plays old time jazz music in the twenties
and thirties called The Sad De Pa Boys.
And I have a, uh, eight piece brass band as well.
So, uh, I've been around for 25 years here
and, uh, yeah, I'm thrilled to, to have this chance
to do something big in 2027
and basically the one this year will serve as a pilot.
Um, and I'm really thrilled about that.
Alright, thank you Mr. Shami.
Okay. We have someone else who would like
to make public comment. Thank you.
Hey, everybody, Shara D 27 Arlington Road.
Many of you also know me
as the city's communications officer,
but tonight I'm here as a resident of South Portland.
And, um, many times when I'm feeling kind of bogged down
in negativity and a little bit blue, I think to myself,
what would Russ l do in this moment?
And what Russ l would do is come to a city council meeting
and share some positivity and gratitude.
So I would like to do that tonight.
I would like to say thank you
to our public work staff who's working really hard
to keep our streets clear and safe,
and our sidewalks too, even those are harder
to get to 'cause they come after.
And for a lot of important reasons.
I would like to thank those staff members
and also the staff working behind the scenes really hard,
including Melissa Hutchins
and Denise Mishu, um, who again, do a lot
of really hard work during, during storms
and especially these past couple
of weeks when we had the perfect storm
of a snowstorm on Christmas Eve.
Um, a trash pickup that Cosella had to cancel due
to the weather conditions.
Um, a postponement that couldn't get all the way picked up
because there's so much, um, extra garbage there.
And I was one of those people who had,
did not have my trash picked up.
And I hauled it over to the transfer station, which we work
to help make sure that folks could bring it there, um,
for free the weekend after.
So, so much goes into that,
that the public doesn't get to see.
So I wanted to express my thanks personally,
um, as a resident.
I also want to really thank Kevin
and the whole parks team who are working so hard to keep
and make Mill Creek Park such a lovely place to be.
I enjoy being there and skating. My boys love to be there.
Skating, the lights are gorgeous and it just brings me,
and I know a lot of residents such joy to drive by that park
and see that going on.
Um, my favorite thing about working in this city is getting
to work with city staff from every single department
and having real firsthand knowledge of the care and the love
and the pride that our city staff takes in,
in their work for this community.
Um, and so I wanted to have the chance to share that.
I mean, people really pour their hearts into this community
and it really, it really shows
and has been clear to me,
especially these past couple weeks.
I swear I did not know that Carl
and Melissa were going to be here tonight.
Is that true? I don't know if I sat in the right seat.
Is that Russ's seat or the one behind?
But anyway, I hope
that I'm really carrying his torch tonight.
And just thank you to all our city staff
and our city leadership
for making sure we have such a great, um,
team here working for our community.
And I'm proud to be part of it. Thank you.
Thank you Resident D thank you very much.
Is there anyone else who would like to make public comment?
Okay, well, um, we're going
to close this session of public comment.
I remind you that there is another citizen discussion, um,
coming up and that will be relatively soon.
Okay. Well, so good luck.
Anyone decides luck, they need to say more words.
Oh yeah, it's gonna be kind OFM tonight. Alright.
We don't seem to have items for public hearings. And action.
So let's move on to action on old
and new business with the city clerk.
Please read order number
14 or ordinance number 14 25 26, amending chapter 18 Parks
and Recreation to add an article for cemeteries.
This will be the first reading
that was postponed from December 4th, 2025,
and will require a majority vote.
Thank you. Thank you. Did you want to talk us
Through this one? Sure. Just briefly,
counselor.
So before you, um, is an
or is a is an amended, uh, proposal from last time,
which had an incorrect reference to a section.
What happened was, um, uh, this, um, amendment
regarding cemeteries had been proposed several years ago
when Barb Skelton was code enforcement director.
And so it referenced at the time a new section, um, uh,
section that hadn't been taken up in the ordinance.
And since then we had added a ordinance about the Petroli
property and did not update, um, uh,
this document to reflect that.
So, uh, counselor West actually caught it for us.
So thank thank you for that.
Um, effectively what we're asking you tonight is
to add an article into chapter 18 that authorizes, um,
the creation of rules for city maintain cemeteries.
And I guess that's an important term
and we're probably gonna need an amendment tonight to,
to really make that clear.
It doesn't apply to the city technically owns zero
cemeteries in the city of South Portland.
We maintain too,
because by default, um, there are no longer trustees
to take care of those cemeteries.
This is, um, Browns Hill and Bayview.
Um, and so essentially under state law it says that, um,
between certain periods of the year, if no one else does it,
we have the responsibility
to maintain at a minimum veteran's graves.
And it wouldn't make sense.
I use this analogy all the time to go in to maintain, oh,
this one's a veteran's grave, we're gonna mow here.
These aren't, so we're gonna skip this,
we're gonna mow this one at, that's just kind of silly.
So we would do the whole thing.
And so anyway, those two have defaulted
to us over the years.
And so what we'd like to do, uh, is to be able
to adopt rules and regulations
and charges for any services like burials
or whatever, um, that we may need in order to, um, govern,
uh, the cemeteries that are, are within our control.
And so, um, as you'll see here, the the criteria
for these rules are they, they're not inconsistent
with state law or other city ordinances.
You all get the chance to approve them in advance
before they come into effect.
Um, and they're also in writing
and filed in the office of the city clerk
where the public can inspect them at any time.
So that's what we're asking for tonight.
If you give an okay to this first reading, um, in two weeks,
this would appear as a second read.
And at the same time we would put forth the rules
that we're proposing so
that you could approve them at the same time
and then they would become effective when the ordinance
becomes effective 20 days after that.
Um, and so, um, I I guess we didn't wanna spend more time on
that if this wasn't something that you, um, wanted
to continue with.
Um, we think you should. So that's what I have to say.
That's what you're voting on tonight.
Carl or Brandon, anything that you want to add?
I know, I know at least at a minimum about the terms
that we're using in here also need to be changed
to make it even more clear that this just applies
to city maintain cemeteries
and not Portland, uh, owned cemeteries
or privately owned or whatever.
Yeah. And, um, thank you Scott.
So, um, as we were reviewing this with, with Carl, um,
if you remember, I I was absent for that, for that meeting
and, um, there was some emails that came out
after that were clarifying some
of the changes that need to be made.
Um, I miss, I frankly misinterpreted some of the, uh,
clarifications that were being asked for in terms
of there were no owned cemetery, so we made it broader,
not realizing it was supposed to just be for the manage.
So we, we added additional language, uh, to make it
explicitly clear in ordinance, um,
that it's cemeteries managed by the city of South Portland,
uh, quote unquote city cemeteries and not all cemeteries.
Um, so, um, a minor tweak to
what I think is in your packet to add the, the language, um,
and I I can just read it.
The Parks and recreation director may adopt such rules,
regulations, and changes as in his, her, her judgment
that may be necessary for the government
of the se government of the cemeteries managed by the city
of South Portland, uh, parentheses the city cemeteries
and parent, and the rest of it, the language stays the same.
Um, so that's just making it perfectly clear that it's just
city managed and the rules will reflect that as well.
And we will, uh, explicitly list,
and I know this is a request from Councilor West
and the rules will where we'll is
where we'll explicitly list the specific cemeteries
that are managed by, by the City of South Wales.
So you'll see that the next time.
I just wanted to make sure the ordinance was very clear
that it's only managed
Carl anything to add?
Yep.
Hi, Carl Coughlin, director Parks Corporation,
waterfront and Cemetery.
Um, I don't have anything to add beyond what Scott
and Brandon already added,
but I'm happy to answer any questions that you may have.
Okay, thank you Carl.
Okay, nothing further. Alright.
Any counselors have questions? Counselor West?
Again, further clarification when we manage them, is it
because we're required by state law to manage them?
As I said earlier, at minimum the veterans graves.
And so, like I said, it doesn't make sense if we're gonna
mow part of it, just where the veteran's graves are.
We generally have to keep them
and I think determine the law is good repair between the,
um, uh, the months of May through September.
Um, and so if we're out there with a lawnmower, we might
as well just, you know, mow it all.
Uh, in, in the case of Brownsville Cemetery,
we actually have an agreement with, uh,
the council entered into an agreement with the church.
They gave us a significant sum of money
to put into a trust to help maintain that.
But we're obligated, um, not just by state law,
but by that agreement by the council.
And I think 20 18 19 to, to do that.
And is the proposal that,
am I interpreting the proposal correctly
that it would contract out the maintenance of these except
for the one or whatever?
Is that what the department wants to do?
So, um, right now we um, we maintain
and we mow Brown Soul Cemetery.
We contract out the maintenance of, uh, baby Cemetery just
because it's so large
and it would take too much staff time, uh, to mow.
And then, uh, any burials that we have, we work with the,
the funeral homes and they, uh, they coordinate the burials.
So we're just pretty much hands off
with the management of Baby Cemetery.
Any further questions? Now, councilor West?
Uh, it's kind of an, it's kind of, it's a question
that maybe isn't the right time
to ask, but I'll ask it anyway.
Maybe we can discuss later of whether there'd be some way
to set up, since we have some kind of a fund already for one
of them, to try to encourage people in the community
who maybe have ancestors or relatives
or something in these cemeteries to contribute to a fund
to try to offset the maintenance costs
that the city incurs for this.
Now we can talk about that later.
Alright, that's going on the list for when later comes.
Any other questions from councilors? Councilor Walker? So
We're not looking at hiring a sexton
or any of the step,
we're just looking at whether we're
going to, okay, thank you.
Okay. Any other questions from counselors?
I actually have a question I
and I see in our packet ordinance and amended.
I thought we would be voting on amended basic
based on the fact that, um,
we've just heard about amendments
and yet that language doesn't seem
to track with what you are saying.
So, yeah, sorry for the clarification.
Are we still needing to amend
The amended one got part of what the request was,
it changed the reference
to the right section of the ordinance.
So, so you want to pass the amended one,
but then, then you want to further amend it
as corporation counsel and suggested
The amended. Yeah.
Okay. So you're amending the amended version.
Apologies for the confusion.
Oh, I love it. It just makes our,
Well, we figured it was a slow night.
We might as well give you a little
something to talk about. Fun.
Okay. So no further council questions then.
Um, we will open the item up
for public comment At this time,
do we have any public comment on this item?
We don't seem to have any.
Um, what is the wish of the council?
It looks like Mr. Matthews is moving
move passage for passage.
And is that seconded?
That seems to be seconded by Counselor Walker.
Do you want me to move an amendment now?
Well, I was going to, okay.
I'll recognize the person who moved for passage,
that would be Counselor Matthews,
and maybe he'll talk us through the amendment.
I just, uh, as far as this goes, uh, you know, I kind of,
I have a couple of relatives that are actually, uh, uh,
custodians of like, uh, the, uh, cemetery next to, uh,
the big apple and, uh, some of the other cemeteries too.
So, um, I actually like your thought process
that we're gonna talk about later.
Okay. Later. Uh, but, uh, yeah, I think it's important
for us to be able to maintain these, uh, cemeteries
and do it in a, uh, respectful way.
And, um, I, I I guess I'm glad with all the cemeteries
that we do have around that is,
is only two at this particular time.
So, um, so, uh, I will, uh, post the floor
to, uh, council Pride.
I, it was Counselor Walker was the second,
Yes. Oh, council Walker
second.
I actually, I agree with what you're saying
and I have nothing further to add.
Alright. Then it still sounds as if you are
Oh, yes.
No, I'd like to move an amendment to the ordinance as
amended initially.
And I, if I'm interpreting
what the Corporation Council said, that in the fir the first
sentence where it says the third line for the government
of the cemeteries, we would change in
to maintained by,
Managed by City of, managed
by the city of South Portland.
Alright.
Oh, second it. Okay.
Is this working for you? Okay.
So what we'll be voting for first is in support
of the amendment of the amended.
Um, I think we can do that right now. All in favor?
That is a unanimous vote. Alright.
Unless there's anything else,
I think we'll now vote on the amended.
All in favor of that another unanimous vote. We're good.
Thank you very much. Um, may I just say that, um,
the idea of discussing potentially this sounds like the city
developing a fund that, um, residents
or anyone could contribute to toward maintenance.
Would that be part of our budget discussions
or when might we bring that back?
I mean, we, we could, we could create it if that seems
to be just the consensus,
unless you all wanted to talk about it further,
we could create, set you fund
and, um, you'd have to still accept donations
to it like you do whenever you have meetings.
But, um, but yeah, leave it up to you.
We can talk about how you want to handle that going forward,
but that's something that we can do.
Councillor West, I I also don't understand this item
the way it's on the agenda
because in the staff report it does have proposals
for the management of these cemeteries.
And it has option one and option two,
and then a recommendation that we approve option one,
which is that the UMACTUALLY three options,
it says currently unknown cut, which is option one is
that the city initiate a request for proposal
to hire a contracted sexton
and contracted staff oversee management
and maintenance of the cemeteries throughout the city.
And under this option, the city would continue, et cetera.
It's in the memo,
but it's not specifically called out on the agenda.
So what are we supposed to do with this recommendation?
Yeah, sorry, if that wasn't more clear.
That was just a memo from 2021 when the council
before many of the, your time here on the,
that when the council workshoped this
and we had presented some of these options to the council
and they gave us guidance at the time.
Um, and, um, essentially no cemetery commission needed, um,
and, uh, uh, um, come back with an ordinance amendment
to allow for rules and that due to COVD, the transition and,
and staffing and everything, just other priorities
that got put on the back burner.
So we included this for reference,
but that o obviously wasn't anything you, we were looking
to, to re-litigate, um, with the council tonight.
You satisfied with that response or have a
Follow question? Yeah, I just hope that in
general the items could be a
little bit clearer for the council as we're trying
to pick up these things, especially those
of us who weren't around.
But it is an indication of
how long it seems to take to get things done
Well. And
it is noted that the pandemic helped to delay.
So let let's give, give a little, uh, prop to that.
Um, back to the fund discussion.
It sounds like what our city manager is saying is
that you can go ahead and establish such a fund with rules
and all kinds of fun things.
Will that come back to us? Or
It it would, it would need
to if you're gonna technically yes.
So, um, but we're happy if that seems to be the will
of the council to bring something forward to set that up
so folks can donate to it.
Can I ask if that could just be a part of the rules
that are proposed by Carl
That to, to have Yeah,
I don't know if it would go in the rules itself,
but we could bring it back for, I think you could work
with Alan just to make sure it's T'S or Cross I
or dotted, um, so that you could approve the creation of
that fund at that same meeting.
I got it. It's not appropriate for that sort of document.
I just wonder if that makes sense to be a part of the sort
of package of rules and regulations
Anyone else have comments about?
So basically we're just giving, uh,
the public works direct.
I mean the, uh, parks rec director, uh, direction on talking
to Ellen about possible donations for cemetery upkeep.
Is that correct?
To come back right. To, to, to come back.
When we bring the rules to you with the,
with the second read of this ordinance change,
we're gonna bring with you the rules that you have
to approve and part of that conversation will be creation
of a fund that folks can contribute to.
Okay. Uh, to help with the upkeep
and maintenance of cemeteries. Yep.
Alright. Okay.
Sounds like a plan. No one had any further comments.
Alright, thank you very much.
Um, Madam City clerk,
would you read order number one 18 please? Order
Number 1 18 25 26 amending city council rules
pass requires majority vote.
All Right. Okay.
So council, um,
last month you remember we had a brief workshop on the
annual review of your rules, um,
and you had made, uh, two changes.
One at their request of staff, another, um, uh,
that council had, um, had asked for.
So the first one is a change to rule 18 relates
to if a counselor makes a motion to reconsider, um,
at the next succeeding regular meeting,
which is required by your rules.
If someone wants to reconsider a motion, um,
they may not shall, but they may inform the city clerk.
And if they do, the matter will be noticed on the agenda,
under action on hold.
A new business. Just as a point of clarification, it,
if a counselor wants to make a motion to reconsider,
it doesn't technically have to be on the agenda
and counselor could still make it.
This is just saying if there is, um, wanting
to give people a heads up, including the public
and the other counselors that, um, that that's
how it would be listed on the agenda.
The other one, uh, changes the time from Wednesday at noon
to Tuesday at four 30 of the week
before the meeting, at which time all agenda items
and, um, associated backup materials are, are due.
Um, so you've got the red line version in front of you.
If you're, uh, good with, uh, this, uh,
and you approve it tonight, it goes into effect immediately.
And Scott, I I just also wanted to note for counselors
and for the public that it's not
as if this is now carved in stone, never to be touched ever
for the following year.
If a counselor has an idea for a rule change,
that can be brought up during the next year.
Yep. Okay. Any questions from counselors?
Thank you, counselor West.
Uh, just what I had pointed out in email
that the document has a table of contents,
but the pages aren't numbered.
When we save this as a document
and if it's enacted,
can somebody please put numbers on the pages?
Yes. Any objection to numbers on the page? No.
Just kidding. Any other questions from counselors?
Thank you. Alright, this item is open for public comment.
We don't appear to have any public comment.
What is the wish of the council? So, Mr.
Council pride moves for passage. Seconded.
Hello? Hello. Counselor Matthews seems
to second Councilor Pride.
No comments. Councilor Matthews. All good.
Alright, let's move for passage.
Um, sorry, I'm, I'm forgetting my words. Um, all in favor.
Thank you. The motion
passes unanimously.
Um, Madam City Clerk,
would you please read order one 19. Order
Number 1, 19 25, 26, acceptance of grants
and donations passes prize majority vote.
And this is the season where we typically see our donations
to our heating assistance program.
So we do have 2,500 gallons
of home heating oil from global partners.
We had individuals, uh, participate with donations of $50
as well as another $50 from Andrew Chandler, Lynn Roth,
and, and Lumiere.
And then we've had two donations for our library.
One for $200 and one for $100.
Nice. Nice, nice.
Any questions or comments from counselors? Counselor West?
Uh, just a question on the library donations, it,
if they're not specifically earmarked for something,
which they may be, could we, uh, designate
that those contributions will go into the library building
fund that we could set work up?
Right now every dollar counts.
I, yeah, I'm trying to think here if that,
if it's unrestricted
and they're just wanting to donate it to the library,
um, yeah, I don't know.
Was it an unrestricted donation? Jessie?
Most of 'em are just dep appreciation
to the staff and services, just
Just to the staff. Um, so
you can put it to Yeah, we don't have enough.
Yeah, we don't have a fund, a specific library fund per se.
Um, but yes, we can figure out how to do that.
I, I'm sorry, which one was that? The library one.
The one that says library or the, which one? There are two.
There's two for library Two.
Okay. Any other? Yes,
Counsel, I have two things. I
just wanted to, um, make a comment
to Councilor West's suggestion.
Well, I, I think it's a great suggestion.
Um, I, I am hesitant for council
to decide if the donations are made, um, in appreciation
of the staff and services the library.
I'm hesitant to have council decide where that money
should be directed.
And I, I feel the library staff would be best served
to just distribute those funds.
I just wanted to offer that as an alternative
to designating the money towards a building fund that
doesn't exist right now and may or may not be needed.
I, I think we should just let the library
decide what to do with that money.
And Jen, excuse me. Thank you very much. Anyone else?
So my question is, is that generally what would happen
with a donation like this?
We just go to the general fund,
unless you specifically designate how it'd be
Earmarked. But
have you ever seen the council say,
when an unrestricted gift comes through, we actually want
to help steer it?
Um, I, I haven't, doesn't mean you can't, but I haven't.
Yeah. Um, since I've been here.
Yeah. I, I have to say I think it's well intentioned,
but just from having a bit of a background in fundraising,
generally what I have seen is more of
what Councilor Walker has described,
that an unrestricted gift is sort
of organizationally decided.
And, and I, it feels like we're not maybe the organization
that is the decider.
What we've just heard is that we don't do that either,
but, well, let's just take it off the, off off the table.
We treat it as we usually do, it goes into the general fund.
Okay. Alright. Thank you. Yes. Councilor Walker.
Um, I just had a question. In the documentation,
it shows the Ann Ann la Me's donation is a thousand dollars,
but the order says it's only $50.
And so I didn't know if the order needed to be corrected.
It does. We had too many donations.
I missed that one. Thank you.
Good catch. Okay.
So when we vote, we'll be voting on that. Fixed the amended.
But before we do that, any public comment on our donations?
I don't see any. Alright.
With the amended fix.
All in favor of accepting these donations? Yes.
Make comment or a question? Yes, sure.
Do I to make that after it's moved?
We haven't actually, it's
Not on the table. Oh,
I'm sorry. I lost track. Sorry. That's okay. Okay.
Hang on. For passage. Thank you for moving for passage.
Maybe you'd like to second
I'll second Them. Thank
you. Councilor Scott. Councilor Pride?
Sure. Um, I am going to just simply move
to amend order 1 19 25 26.
Striking the dollar amount 50 that appears at the end
of the sentence that ends and Lumiere in the amount of
and, um, placed in instead a thousand
dollars. I'll second the amendment.
Well, okay. Yes. We're
You're gonna get the talk. I move
for passage of the order.
Now I'm amended asking to amend
It. Thank you. Yeah.
So we need a second on the
amendment. Thank you.
He seconded. Yes. Thank you.
We have, you've seconded twice.
Did you want to now say something?
I wanted to ask if there was recognition
of these donations beyond them being a part
of the city council agenda and order of acceptance.
So the individual departments typically will send thank
you recognitions to them.
Um, if they're larger ones such as the oil
or different corporation that makes a donation,
I send something from my office
thanking them on behalf of the city.
Okay. This is just a quite a significant
contribution from Global Partners, so thank you. You're
Welcome.
Council. Okay. Councilor West. Thank you.
Just to point out that the fiscal note
also needs to be amended.
I don't think we have to move on that, but it is a cler.
Clear.
Okay. Yes. Good. Can we vote
Now? There's a motion to
amend on the table
that needs to be voted on. I thought.
Okay. Yes. Let us vote on the motion to amend.
All in favor. Okay.
Got that done. Now it's perfect.
Now we're all in favor because we did have, it's here.
It's ready for us. All in favor of accepting the donations.
That also is unanimous. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Alright,
citizen discussion part two.
Um, I am wondering if we have anyone who wants to speak,
please come to the podium.
Counselors. Jeff Steinbrink Cottage Road.
So a couple of things.
One, um, I just came from a place
where people were speaking in public
and I was reminded, uh, the main speaker was at home
with the venue
and great at what let's say he or she was doing.
Um, but others, it was tough.
And I was reminded,
and I think we all should be reminded
That this isn't an easy thing to do when we get up
for our three minutes and, uh,
and coming in late, to which I apologize.
I was reminded too of how at home with each other you seem
and how convivial your conversation is.
And the contrast between that can be even more daunting,
I think, for those of us approaching the podium.
So it just might be something to keep in mind that, um,
this isn't the easiest thing to do.
The the second thing is, this is January 6th,
and I don't know, uh, again, I apologize if we've already
mentioned this, but it seems
to me we shouldn't let this anniversary pass
without acknowledging, uh, what we
should have learned, I hope have learned from that awful,
uh, tragedy in our nation's history.
And I especially wanna reinforce, uh, something that, uh,
councilor West said, um, on Facebook earlier today
about the conviviality, to use that word again,
that we should try to practice in our public
and in our private lives with each other.
And I think especially in South Portland, we would do well
to be reminded of how neighborhoody we are
and how those neighborhoods are a great strength and comfort
and joy to us as we live in
and prosper from them.
And that if we can bring to the extent that we can bring
that spirit of neighborhood neighborliness
to these conversations, uh, I think that would be a great
and wonderful thing and a powerful response
to the negative, uh, influence
of this awful commemoration.
So it seems to me that the way in which, uh, people
exercise their power, uh, especially around here, uh,
and this is, uh, reinforcing and invigorating
and healthy for us, is to be able
to speak at places like this
and to do, do so comfortably among your neighbors.
I would just encourage that kind of convivial for all of us.
Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
who wanted to make a comment?
Okay. Seeing non citizen discussion part two is now closed.
I think we'd like to hear some
communication from our city manager.
Okay. Just, uh, wanted to, um, just one thing,
share just a reminder of what's coming up
for your next couple of meetings, both for you counselors
and, uh, members of the public.
Um, next week's obviously a big meeting.
We're gonna be discussing, um, the recommendation, uh,
from the Mahoney City Center Committee.
Uh, and you've seen in the, in the press
and from communications from me and
otherwise, um, what the recommendation is,
what the dollar tag, uh, is associated with that.
So you're gonna hear much more about the committee's work
over the past year, uh, along with, um, uh, information,
um, uh, and,
and essentially seeking direction for next steps, uh, how
to continue what, if any, uh, input council may have
for the committee going forward.
Uh, there is a second part of that workshop next week,
which is, um, housing ordinance updates.
Our planning department will be in here to talk about some
of the changes that main law is requiring, um,
that have either gone into effect will be going into effect
this year or next year.
There are some, uh, I think three specific questions that,
um, related to that law that they,
they want some feedback from council on
before they bring you those updates later this year.
You will see some of the updates coming
to you on January 20th as part of a bunch
of miscellaneous ordinance amendment updates
that are just things that there's really no input needed
from counsel or, you know, or ability to put input on
because the law says you have to do X.
So we're amending our ordinance as such,
but I just wanted to, um,
make sure everyone was aware of that.
And also, um, on February 3rd, uh, you'll be getting,
uh, both a, a presentation on the audit, uh, as well
as a presentation on the request for an extension of the,
uh, tiff, uh, the Texas Instruments tiff,
uh, at that meeting.
And then finally on the 10th, uh, that's when,
and there's other things on these agendas,
but I'm giving some of the highlights on the,
on February 10th, that's when your budget guidance workshop,
um, is with the school board.
Uh, um, and I guess typically, especially
for maybe newer counselor, uh, we typically ask
for what's an acceptable, um,
tax increase for you all this year.
It's a very unfair question
because you don't have much context.
Uh, you know, everyone would like to say no tax increase.
Let's, let's see how we can do with that.
But you don't really have much of the context with it.
So, um, uh,
but we'll be seeking some general guidance then anyway on
what, uh, the budgets that the superintendent
and I present to you in, uh, April, um,
uh, should look like.
So some of the questions you may want to consider, um,
you know, if you're not able to, uh,
give specific guidance on a budget number, uh,
would be things like, is this a year to be looking
to add new positions or not?
Is it a year to be adding new programs or not?
Because that type of guidance
will help at a minimum my budget, um, uh, work as I,
as I talk to the departments about their requests.
So if you can just start thinking about, uh, what
that looks like this year.
We'll try to give you our best estimates both on the school
and city side, that a minimum what we're facing
for cost increases.
We know waste management contracts are increasing.
Eco main costs are increasing union wages,
as you know, are, are going up.
Um, all these other things, the school has their own, um,
cost drivers that they'll be talking about.
So we can give you kind of a baseline of, you know, here's
what we know so far.
But, um, but anyway, I just wanted
to make sure everyone had a, had a heads up on that.
The, the last thing I'll give you an update on is today the,
um, the, uh,
Willard Beach paid parking working group had their first
meeting, they reviewed their charge that you all gave them.
They reviewed certain sections
of the Willard Beach master plan.
They elected a chair, Peter Wilson, vice, uh,
Adrian Jalbert, vice Chair Peter Wilson.
And, um, they're gonna start meeting monthly now.
Uh, I get the sense from them, it's not gonna be realistic
to have them presenting you, you something in time
for this summer or for budget season.
So, um, we're probably looking out after that.
But anyway, uh, wanted to give you that update.
And that's, uh, all I have.
All right, thank you, Scott.
We now have reached count time for counselors round robin.
I have a couple of items,
but first I'd like to find out if my other counselors do.
Can we, let's lead off with Counselor Scott.
Uh, sure. Happy New Year, everyone.
Um, I've been thinking a lot about the day today
and what's happened in the past
and how we need to go forward in our civility.
So thank you Mr. Steinberg for reminding us of that.
Um, I did wanna update that we had a great, um,
talk with a counselor
Office hours, office
Hours, um, in December that, um, mayor Tipton
and, uh,
legislator Carney, Senator
Carney, Senator Kearney, excuse me, um, came to,
and it was, um, very helpful
and I think, uh, inspired me to keep that going and to try
and find more opportunities to sort of connect
on a open discussion basis with, um, folks in our community.
So thank you for kicking that off.
Thank you for having that one. And,
And I always thank Councilor Walker
because she has led us in having regular office hours.
So yes. Speaking of Councilor Walker, any round robin items?
Yes. Um, one, I wanted to thank you both
for stepping in when I couldn't
in December for the office hours.
So thank you for that. Um, January, office hours
2026 office hours are still in flux, so
that hopefully I will be able to nail
that down and get some dates out soon.
Um, the only thing that I wanted to mention, I just wanted
to highlight, um, the repair fair
that the Waste Reduction Committee has coming up on the,
hold on, I wrote it down 24th, um, at the library.
It's from 10 to one.
This is their second annual repair fair.
It was highly successful
and very well attended the last time.
It's a great concept. Basically, you, you bring your stuff,
you got a lamp that doesn't work.
You have pants that need to be mended.
You're someone like me that cannot sew a lick.
Um, there, there are lovely people there on a volunteer
basis and from the community that come and help out.
Um, and you can get your items repaired for free.
So it is just a fabulous, um, thing
that the Waste Reduction Committee, um, does.
And I'm super excited that they're doing it again.
So I would encourage counselors to come and check it out.
And also congratulations to 'em for, um, moving it forward.
Thank you, Councillor Coleman.
Uh, happy New Year to everyone.
Um, and it's starting off more exciting than
I had wanted it to be.
And today I did spend some time watching, um, there was an,
a live, um, senator, so, um, uh, mostly, um,
the Democrats who were at present in the Capitol during
January 6th, uh, five years ago.
And that was, uh, I couldn't watch it all.
So, um, I, I do understand what you're saying, Jeff.
And, um, in the repair fair, I told,
and I was trying to think who I told about
that we were doing that,
and they, they're, it wasn't somebody from South Portland
and they're going to initiate that through their library
because they think it's anything.
They keep stuff out of the landfill and,
and it's the, the New England thing
is, you know, wear it out.
Um, use it up or do without. There's, it's, I got it.
Not quite right, but it's
Really, I think we get
The choose really take care of what you have.
Thank you very much, Councillor Pride.
Just wish everyone a Happy New Year and pass
Councillor West.
I also want to acknowledge
that today is January 6th and I appreciate Mr.
Steinbrink reading my Facebook post.
I do not post on Facebook very often.
I'm kind of an anti-social media person,
but I would like to share with the council one,
one part of that post.
And it was simply to point out that these are
very rough times for our country.
Uh, and yet we're beginning the celebration
of our 250th year.
And to say to our community as South Portland
observes the 250th year of our country,
let's renew our belief in the values on which our
country was established.
Let's disagree if we need to on individual issues,
but let's share our commitment to a community
where we can listen to each other, live together,
treat each other with respect,
and work toward a better quality of life for us all.
Thank you very much. Councilor West. Councilor Matthews.
I would like to thank everybody
for the three presents that we got tonight.
Uh, city clerk gave us pictures of ourselves.
I like that. And Perkin and Toxin gave us chocolates.
I put them away. And, uh, did you hear that wifey?
I put the chocolate away.
And then the third person I'd like to thank for her profound
questions and observations
and having the meeting go 30 minutes longer than it should
have is Council West.
Thank you very much.
Oh, counselor Matthews.
Um, thank you Counselor Matthews.
Um, I have a couple of things that I, one is
that I was asked by school board chair DeAngelos to, um,
put a date out there
on January 22nd from six to 8:00 PM
The location is still to be determined.
Um, the school board is going to hold a, um,
school budget discussion.
Um, it's a citizen forum
and I think they're looking for ideas
and feedback of some potential cost saving
measures within the schools.
So hold that date January 22nd.
Um, and then the other I wanted to just mention, um,
property taxes, everyone's favorite subject.
Um, obviously a real concern for our residents.
Um, the legislature you may know,
has started a statewide property tax relief task force,
and they're charged with taking a deeper look at
what drives property taxes, who's being most affected,
what changes might actually help without shifting the burden
around or creating any new problems
or challenges for cities and towns.
So the first report of
that task force is due soon this month, and the city manager
and the city council are paying attention to that.
And, um, any recommendations that will come forward.
This task force is going to continue to meet
through the year, and
so they'll have a final report at the end of the year.
But South Portland is certainly part of the conversation.
We understand the stress of rising property taxes,
especially for our seniors and people on fixed incomes.
And, um, we are paying attention, we are engaged
and we're looking for solutions that can be fair
and workable for the community.
So I wanted to put that out there.
Alright, um, thank you everyone
for attending tonight's meeting.
One other quick reminder, um, that next Tuesday,
January 13th is when we'll hold our council workshop
to learn and discuss more about our Mahoney
Committee's recommendations.
Um, and with that, do we have a motion to adjourn?
Motion to adjourn. Uh, councilor Walker a second here.
Everyone. Councilor Coleman.
I think we can be unanimous in that. Thank you very much.
We are adjourned.
Do you know? No, I, yeah, I.